plastic bottles toothbrushes face wipes
bags and takeaway boxes how did our
planet become so plastic plastic is an
almost inescapable part of our modern
world and I have to admit that in some
ways it's amazing it's durable
lightweight resistant to water and
sterile and it's enabled us to make
innovations in travel communications and
healthcare that wouldn't have otherwise
been possible but plastic is also cheap
and easy to produce which means that it
also gets used for disposable items too
and it's these single-use items that
have a negative impact on our
environment and in particular our oceans
it's thought that if we continue with
our trend of plastic consumption by 2050
there be more plastic in the ocean than
fish but how do we escape our plastic
addiction I personally try and live a
relatively waste-free lifestyle but I
definitely have some slippers I want to
share with you the lessons that I've
learned the swaps I've made in the areas
that I struggle with and I also want to
talk to members of the BBC I thirteen
who tried to live one-month plastic
three it is the first of July which
means that I'm now in plastic free July
something I'm taking in with some
colleagues BBC studios and we're giving
up single-use plastic for a whole month
Luke he lived a month plastic free what
inspired you to do that it's something
that I wouldn't have previously thought
about and I think that's what made me
think oh yeah I should give that a go
because I know it's such a big
conversation now and so I was like yes I
should definitely throw myself into
something that I know absolutely nothing
about
so you're saying before you did this
challenge you were not a conscious
consumer yeah no I was very much just
kind of coffee carps and yeah ready
meals and whatever I just wouldn't think
about it at all where there's the whole
plastic free July 15 me into that oh
this is all stuff I should be doing and
oh my god everything is plastic like
meals like even just like buying stuff
from supermarkets little tiny things
couldn't eat crisps man that was tough
that was tough all this stuff is
completely new to me
it was such a headache yeah it was so
infuriating but I've come out of it
feeling a lot better about all that
stuff I feel like it literally makes no
sense that you just can't get food
without plastic yeah I feel like I did
pretty well
I think the main thing of the month is
to attempt plastic free and there's
probably a few places where I couldn't
avoid it and I think the main thing I've
come to realize is just plastic is
everywhere and so convenient see I
didn't think I'd realized how much it
would affect me and now I'm gonna try
and continue to not buy plastic and keep
it up and we keep cutting water bottle
and everything to see how I go grocery
shopping is one of the worst offenders
when it comes to plastic waste
Supermarket packaging is thought to
contribute over 800,000 tonnes of
plastic waste every single year that's
equivalent to a hundred and fifty
thousand African elephants in the
average UK household over fifty percent
of the waste produced comes from
supermarket packaging it seems like
everything is wrapped in plastic but
there are alternatives we visited a bulk
store a shop where you buy groceries
from self-serve tubs meaning you get
minimal packaging still being all over
the floor so it might be a bit expensive
consumers - do you have them so people
who are coming in they seem quite scared
and quite a friend as well especially to
touch stuff because it can be quite
daunting but because am I in here all
the time why can we talk you through the
process it's a one-on-one experience I
think people find shopping packaging
free quite expensive example if you are
to buy another card a loose I'd be more
expensive than to in many
packaging so help me make that cheaper
more accessible so yes people see
someone zero races being a rule you know
middle class you have to have wanted to
do it you don't I grew up in a 0x house
on the move just a little bit poor not
because we chose to but if you do have
the choice and you have the means to do
it then you should do it then that push
up demand more stuff of comic cardboard
and packaging than all we ask for it
these bookstores are great but they're
clean not mainstream just yet and when
you're outside of a major city they
could be pretty hard to come by it seems
like we're not going to be giving up on
the convenience of supermarkets just yet
so what can they do to reduce their
waste footprint so really if I was a
supermarket I'd be looking first out
taking off all of the non recyclable so
any kind of material that just cannot be
recycled it should have no place on our
shelves that styrofoam polystyrene and
black plastic trays all of those kinds
of things and then I would start setting
reduction targets so really the only way
we're going to be able to stop plastic
pollution getting worse is if we stop
producing quite so much of it and that's
what supermarkets can play a really key
role in do you think it was more
expensive for you to try and live
plastic three full months yes buying
loose beds I just don't understand why
but it's some for some reason is more
expensive but then you get little things
like you almost get the reward for being
plastic free where you know you take
your reusable coffee cup and you get 50
P off for something in your your
favorite coffee shop that's great I
think there should be more things like
that because for terrible simple-minded
people like me I'm like cool reward like
yeah yeah yeah psychologically like
great I should do more plastic free
stuff I think that's kind of there
should be more of an incentive for that
you know if you're getting loose veg
while you're not getting money off while
you want to pay more I've actually ended
up buying more coffee in coffee shops
yeah because of that because I have my
own card I want to make use of it and
also I get a reward it's it's good in
the UK we use seven million disposable
coffee cups every single day a total of
2.5 billion a year
these coffee cups are made of a tricky
mix of paper and plastic which means
that only 1% of them end up being
recycled most shops now offer a
substantial discount for bringing in a
reusable cup yet only 2% of takeaway
coffees are served in them why aren't we
taking up the offer in the year 2015-16
we used 191,000 disposable cups at the
University and sales of drinks and
reusable mugs were only hovering around
3% save 25 P on your your coffee or your
tea or your takeaway drink but it wasn't
having a particularly big effect on
sales of drinks and reusable cups
[Music]
he actually changed the prices and you
could see so quickly the change that
took place I think within the first week
we hit twenty percent sold in a reusable
cup I think to get the real meaningful
behavior change you need the sort of
yeah the stick hope that the carrot so
the penalty and not the incentives
starburst in a similar trial switching
from discounts to charges and found that
almost three times more people started
using that reusable cups so is the
solution to introduce a lot a levy this
is a compulsory fee for using disposable
cups our findings went forward to the
environmental audit Commission so that
reported to government at the start of
this year and recommended a twenty five
P tax the lot a levy as it was called
and we were really supported because of
course we've got the you know the proofs
in the pudding we've seen how well it's
worked here at Winchester people might
make behavior change in their own life
with a bit of encouragement but you will
need government to legislate for it so
that it's a fair playing field across
the high street I think the biggest
thing I learned is just it is everywhere
and it's so convenient for everything to
just be covered in plastic which like
sounds so obvious to some people but to
me just open my eyes to be like it is
everywhere and did it shift your
behaviors after the month was over have
you changed anything in your lifestyle
since then yes the whole plastic free
July was very much kind of a how plastic
freak am I live so I did in August kind
of went back and you know August first I
had a great packet of crisps guys but
like that was but that was it after that
it's now just to being about being
mindful of not you know if there is an
option to get loose veg I won't do that
now even if it's a bit more money I will
go for that option I as I said I went
quite far on the whole plastic region
lifes I thought what can I change that
I'm not already doing I was already
doing keep copes house all you're doing
reusable water bottles so it was how can
I take that next step for a month so we
don't know if you looked beyond food
yeah but as a woman you have to remove
your makeup and I was using single use
cotton realms I was using single-use
face wipes which were actually made of
plastic which don't biodegrade Wow so I
switched to using flannels with a
cleanser also switched to a bamboo
toothbrush
little things I like that yeah I did
halfway through July was like oh yeah my
toothbrushes yeah yeah it's I think it's
that's the next level of it and I think
I hope I can kind of almost get there if
somebody else wants to do a challenge
like this what advice would you give
them from your experiences you've got to
break your routines you've got a you've
got to go out of your way to actually
find the places that you can go to it's
hard at first it's really hard but once
you get into that new routine I think
you get quite comfortable and I think
another thing to say is like don't be
too hard on yourself because our life is
built around plastic and I think it is
nigh on impossible especially in central
London to go a whole month without
encountering any plastic in your life if
you do Bravo yeah but I think the vast
majority of us that's really really
tough challenge so if you do have
slip-ups like it's not the end of the
world you just make sure that you're
conscious with your consumption and that
you try and avoid that same mishap the
next day I think if you still have a 75%
plastic free month that is amazing
considering the world we live in at the
moment so yeah it's it's these things
happen but the issue of plastic
pollution has recently come into public
consciousness and now the power is in
our hands to make positive changes to
our daily lives these could be small
swaps such as switching from single-use
coffee cups and water bottles to a
usable ones or larger shifts in shopping
and eating habits every single one of
these changes small or large will help
to reduce avoidable plastic waste and
help to support our planet so I want to
know have you taken a plastic free
challenge or just try to reduce your
plastic consumption let us know in the
comments down below and make sure you
subscribe and stay tuned because we have
lots more videos coming soon
you